docs: add new cli builder api guide (#29964)
angular/angular: aio/content/guide/architect.md

> # Introducing Architect

Reviewer: There's an example available [here](https://github.com/mgechev/cli-builders-demo).

In Angular version 6, the Angular CLI introduced the workspace configuration file, `angular.json`, and reworked many core concepts of how its commands were implemented.
Commands fall into the following three basic categories, which are handled using different underlying tools.

1. Miscellaneous commands that are not specific to a project include `ng help`, `ng version`, `ng config`, `ng doc`, `ng analytics` (new in version 8).
   The commands are executed directly by CLI code.

1. *Schematic* commands were introduced in CLI version 6 and are now used for most commands that touch your code, such as `ng new`, `ng generate`, `ng add`, and `ng update`.

>    The CLI uses the Schematics library to generate and modify your code. Angular supplies default schematics that control the behavior of these commands, which you can modify or extend. (Read more about [schematics](https://angular.io/guide/schematics).

Reviewer: There's one missing in the end `(Read more about [schematics](https://angular.io/guide/schematics)`

1. *Architect* commands run a process on your code, such as linting, building, or testing.
   CLI commands use an internal tool called Architect to run *builders*, which implement the application of another tool for the desired task.

> Architect was originally designed to allow people to replace their webpack configuration and switch to an entirely different build system.

Reviewer: I'd suggest to drop the history from the intro. It's just an extra information which might not be too valuable to readers. I've edited the content [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KUbOzGy6wPZIWqhsc4ekHA60tzJv1PP995ay2wTmFcU/edit) (shared it with your Slack email, Judy).

With Angular version 8, Architect is officially supported and is available to developers who want to customize the Angular CLI by adding or modifying commands. For example, you could supply a builder to perform an entirely new task, or to change which third-party tool is used by an existing command.

This document introduces the tool, explains how it integrates with the workspace configuration file, and shows how you can create your own builder.

<div class="alert is-helpful">

   You can find the code from the examples used here in [this GitHub repository](https://github.com/mgechev/cli-builders-demo).

</div>

## Architect builders

The Architect tool delegates work to handler functions called [*builders*](guide/glossary#builder).
A builder handler function receives two arguments; a set of input `options` (a JSON object), and a `context` (a `BuilderContext` object).

The separation of concerns here is the same as with Schematics.

* Options are given by the CLI user, context is provided by and provides access to the Architect API, and the developer provides the behavior.

> * The `BuilderContext` object provides access to the scheduling method, `BuilderContext.scheduleTarget()`. The scheduler executes the builder handler function with a given *target* configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `BuilderContext` object provides access to the scheduling method, `BuilderContext.scheduleTarget()`. The scheduler executes the builder handler function with a given [*target* configuration](#target-configuration).
```

> The builder handler function can be synchronous (return a value) or asynchronous (return a new Promise), or it can watch and return multiple values (return an Observable).

Reviewer: Makes sense also. `return a Promise` sounds more accurate.

> The return value or values must always be of type `BuilderOutput`.

Reviewer 2: It may be out of the scope of this PR, but it would certainly be nice to get APIs like `BuilderOutput`, `BuilderContext`, etc to appear under the [API docs](https://pr29964-4c00fbc.ngbuilds.io/api).

Author: Yes, out of scope. We should open an Issue.

Reviewer 2: Issue opened https://github.com/angular/angular/issues/30575.

Angular provides some builders that are used by the CLI for commands such as `ng build`, `ng test`, and `ng lint`.
Default target configurations for these and other built-in Architect builders can be found (and customized) in the "architect" section of the [workspace configuration file](guide/workspace-config), `angular.json`.
You can also extend and customize Angular by creating your own builders, which you can run  using the [`ng run` CLI command](cli/run).

### Builder project structure

A builder resides in an Architect "project" folder that is similar in structure to an Angular workspace, with global configuration files at the top level, and more specific configuration in a source folder with the code files that define the behavior.
For example, your `myBuilder` folder could contain the following files.

| FILES    | PURPOSE |
| :----------------------- | :------------------------------------------|
| `src/my-builder.ts`      | Main source file for the builder definition. |
| `src/my-builder.spec.ts` | Source file for tests. |
| `src/schema.json`        | Definition of builder input options. |
| `builders.json`          | Testing configuration. |

> | `package.json`           | Dependencies. |

Reviewer 2: If we're linking to TypeScript below, should we also link to the NPM `package.json` docs? https://docs.npmjs.com/files/package.json

> | `tsconfig.json`          | [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) configuration. |

Reviewer 2: Should we link to the actual `tsconfig.json` docs? https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/tsconfig-json.html

> You can publish the builder to `npm` (see [Publishing your Library](https://angular.io/guide/creating-libraries#publishing-your-library)), and install it using the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can publish the builder to `npm` (see [Publishing your Library](https://angular.io/guide/creating-libraries#publishing-your-library)). If you published it as `@example/my-builder`,  then you can install it using the following command:
```

<code-example language="sh">

npm install @example/my-builder

</code-example>

## Creating a builder

As an example, let’s create a builder that executes a shell command.
To create a builder, use the `createBuilder()` Architect function, and return a `BuilderOutput` object.

<code-example format="." language="typescript" linenums="false">

import { BuilderOutput, createBuilder } from '@angular-devkit/architect';

export default createBuilder(_commandBuilder);

function _commandBuilder(
  options: JsonObject,
  context: BuilderContext,

>   ): Promise<BuilderOutput> {

Reviewer 2: This isn't being rendered properly in the docs. It appears as
```ts
): Promise {
```
Do we need to escape it like `  ): Promise\<BuilderOutput\> {`? 

cc @petebacondarwin

Author: ...trying it...

Reviewer 2: Bummer, no luck. We'll need @petebacondarwin or @gkalpak to weight in with some dgeni insights.

Reviewer 3: Why are you using `code-example` tags here? Why not just use triple backticks? The markdown formatter is clever enough to escape such characters in triple backtick code blocks.

What you have here is created some HTML, i.e. everything within the `<code-example> tag will be parsed as HTML, so you would need to HTML encode them manually. E.g. `Promise&lt;BuilderOutput&gt;`

  ...
}

</code-example>

Now let’s add some logic to it.
The following code retrieves the command and arguments from the user options, spawns the new process, and waits for the process to finish.
If the process is successful (returns a code of 0), it resolves the return value.

<code-example format="." language="typescript" linenums="false">
import { BuilderOutput, createBuilder } from '@angular-devkit/architect';
import * as childProcess from 'child_process';

export default createBuilder(_commandBuilder);

> async function _commandBuilder(

Author: @Splaktar @alan-agius4 Can you speak to this?

> async function _commandBuilder(

Reviewer: Yes, `async` is not necessary here.

> async function _commandBuilder(

Author: What's the correct syntax? Do I simply remove `async`?

  options: JsonObject,
  context: BuilderContext,
): Promise<BuilderOutput> {
  const child = childProcess.spawn(options.command, options.args);

>   return new Promise<BuilderOutput>(resolve => {

Reviewer 2: `<BuilderOutput>` is getting stripped out here and two lines above as well.

Author: replacing code-example tag with 3-backtick notation in all cases

    child.on('close', code => {
      resolve({success: code === 0});
    });
  });
}
</code-example>

### Handling output

By default, the `spawn()` method outputs everything to the process standard output and error.
To make it easier to test and debug, we can forward the output to the Architect logger instead.

> This also allows Architect to execute the builder itself in a separate process, even if the standard output and error are deactivated (as in the [Electron app](https://electronjs.org/)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This also allows Architect to execute the builder itself in a separate process, even if the standard output and error are deactivated (as in an [Electron app](https://electronjs.org/)).
```

We can retrieve a Logger instance from the context.

<code-example format="." language="typescript" linenums="false">
import { BuilderOutput, createBuilder, BuilderContext } from '@angular-devkit/architect';
import * as childProcess from 'child_process';

export default createBuilder(_commandBuilder);

> async function _commandBuilder(

Reviewer: Can we drop async from here as well? This function already returns a promise.

The status string is unmodified unless you pass in a new string value.

You can see an [example](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/blob/ba21c855c0c8b778005df01d4851b5a2176edc6f/packages/angular_devkit/build_angular/src/tslint/index.ts#L107) of how the `tslint` builder reports progress.

In our example, the shell command either finishes or is still executing, so there’s no need for a progress report, but we can report status so that a parent builder that called our builder would know what’s going on.
Use the `BuilderContext.reportStatus()` method to generate a status string of any length.
(Note that there’s no guarantee that a long string will be shown entirely; it could be cut to fit the  UI that displays it.)
Pass an empty string to remove the status.

<code-example format="." language="typescript" linenums="false">
import { BuilderOutput, createBuilder, BuilderContext } from '@angular-devkit/architect';
import * as childProcess from 'child_process';

export default createBuilder(_commandBuilder);

> async function _commandBuilder(

Reviewer: Same here.

  options: JsonObject,
  context: BuilderContext,
): Promise<BuilderOutput> {
  context.reportStatus(`Executing "${options.command}"...`);
  const child = childProcess.spawn(options.command, options.args, {stdio: 'pipe'});

  child.stdout.on('data', (data) => {
    context.logger.info(data.toString());
  });
  child.stderr.on('data', (data) => {
    context.logger.error(data.toString());
  });

  return new Promise<BuilderOutput>(resolve => {
    context.reportStatus(`Done.`);
    child.on('close', code => {
      resolve({success: code === 0});
    });
  });
}
</code-example>

## Builder input

You can invoke a builder indirectly through a CLI command, or directly with the Angular CLI `ng run` command.
In either case, you must provide required inputs, but can allow other inputs to default to values that are pre-configured for a specific [*target*](guide/glossary#target), provide a pre-defined, named override configuration, and provide further override option values on the command line.

> Architect collects the resolved input values into an `options` object, and validates their types before passing them to the builder function.

Reviewer 2: > , and validates their types before passing them to the builder function.

This seems to be repeated again in the next sentence.

      "implementation": "./command",
      "schema": "./command/schema.json",
      "description": "Runs any command line in the operating system."
    }
  }
}

</code-example>

In the `package.json` file, add a `builders` key that tells Architect where to find our builder definition file.

<code-example format="." language="json" linenums="false">

{
  "name": "@example/command-runner",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "Builder for Architect",
  "builders": "builders.json",
  "devDependencies": {
    "@angular-devkit/architect": "^1.0.0"
  }
}

</code-example>

The official name of our builder is now ` @example/command-runner:command`.
The first part  of this is the package name (resolved using node resolution), and the second part is the builder name (resolved using the `builder.json` file).

Using one of our `options` is very straightforward, we did this in the previous section when we accessed `options.command`.

<code-example format="." language="typescript" linenums="false">
    context.reportStatus(`Executing "${options.command}"...`);
    const child = childProcess.spawn(options.command, options.args, { stdio: 'pipe' });

</code-example>

### Target configuration

> A builder must have a defined target that associates it with a specific input configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A builder must have a defined target that associates it with a specific input configuration and [project](guide/glossary#project).
```

By default, for example, the `build` command runs the builder  `@angular-devkit/build-angular:browser` to perform the build task, and passes in default option values as specified for the `build` target in `angular.json`.

<code-example format="." language="json" linenums="false">
{
  "myApp": {
    ...
    "architect": {
        "build": {
             "builder": "@angular-devkit/build-angular:browser",
             "options": {
            "outputPath": "dist/myApp",
            "index": "src/index.html",
        ...
   },
          "configurations": {
            "production": {
                 "fileReplacements": [
                    {
                         "replace": "src/environments/environment.ts",
                         "with": "src/environments/environment.prod.ts"
                    }
                 ],
               "optimization": true,
               "outputHashing": "all",
      ...
            }
             }
        },
       ...

</code-example>

The command passes the builder the set of default options specified in the "options" section.

> If you pass the `--prod` flag, it uses the override values specified in the `production` alternative configuration.

Reviewer 2: The `--prod` flag is a shortcut which may be confusing here. Using `--configuration=production` would be less confusing and more accurate here.

   You pass an `options` object directly to the method, and those option values are validated against the schema of the builder without further adjustment.

   Only the  `BuilderContext.scheduleTarget()` method resolves the configuration and overrides through the `angular.json` file.

</div>

### Default architect configuration

Let’s create a simple `angular.json` file that puts target configurations into context.

We can publish the builder to npm (see [Publishing your Library](https://angular.io/guide/creating-libraries#publishing-your-library)), and install it using the following command:

<code-example language="sh">

npm install @example/command-runner

</code-example>

If we create a new project with `ng new builder-test`, the generated `angular.json` file looks something like this, with only default builder configurations.

<code-example format="." language="json" linenums="false">

{
  // ...
  "projects": {
    // ...
    "builder-test": {
      // ...
      "architect": {
        // ...
        "build": {
          "builder": "@angular-devkit/build-angular:browser",
          "options": {

>             // ... more options in the original

Reviewer 2: What does "the original" mean here?

              // ... more options in the original
              "optimization": true,
              "aot": true,
              "buildOptimizer": true
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
  // ...
}

</code-example>

### Adding a target

Let's add a new target that will run our builder to execute a particular command.
This target will tell the builder to run `touch` on a file, in order to update its modified date.

We need to update the `angular.json` file to add a target for this builder to the "architect" section of our new project.

* We'll add a new target section to the "architect" object for our project.

* The target named "touch" uses our builder, which we published to `@example/command-runner`. (See [Publishing your Library](https://angular.io/guide/creating-libraries#publishing-your-library))

* The options object provides default values for the two inputs that we defined; `command`, which is the Unix command to execute, and `args`, an array that contains the file to operate on.

* The configurations key is optional, we'll leave it out for now.

<code-example format="." language="json" linenums="false">

{
  "projects": {
     "architect": {

>         "builder-test": {

Reviewer 2: The project (builder-test) has to wrap the architect section.

            "outputPath": "dist/builder-test",
            "index": "src/index.html",
            "main": "src/main.ts",
            "polyfills": "src/polyfills.ts",
            "tsConfig": "src/tsconfig.app.json"
          },
          "configurations": {
            "production": {
              "fileReplacements": [
                {
                  "replace": "src/environments/environment.ts",
                  "with": "src/environments/environment.prod.ts"
                }
              ],
              "optimization": true,
              "aot": true,
              "buildOptimizer": true
            }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}

</code-example>

### Running the builder

To run our builder with the new target's default configuration, use the following CLI command.

<code-example language="sh">

   ng run builder-test:touch

</code-example>

This will run the `touch` command on the `src/main.ts` file.

You can use command-line arguments to override the configured defaults.
For example, to run with a different `command` value, use the following CLI command.

<code-example language="sh">

ng run builder-test:touch --command=ls

</code-example>

> This will call the `ls` command instead of the `touch` command.

Reviewer 2: Please add a note somewhere here that this requires a Linux shell like `bash`. 

Linux shells are now widely available on Windows 10, so specifying that this isn't compatible with Windows is probably not needed.

    await architectHost.addBuilderFromPackage('..');
  });

  // This might not work in Windows.
  it('can run ls', async () => {
    // Create a logger that keeps an array of all messages that were logged.
    const logger = new logging.Logger('');
    const logs = [];
    logger.subscribe(ev => logs.push(ev.message));

    // A "run" can have multiple outputs, and contains progress information.
    const run = await architect.scheduleBuilder('@example/command-runner:command', {
      command: 'ls',
      args: [__dirname],
    }, { logger });  // We pass the logger for checking later.

    // The "result" member (of type BuilderOutput) is the next output.
    const output = await run.result;

    // Stop the builder from running. This stops Architect from keeping
    // the builder-associated states in memory, since builders keep waiting
    // to be scheduled.
    await run.stop();

    // Expect that it succeeded.
    expect(output.success).toBe(true);

    // Expect that this file was listed. It should be since we're running
    // `ls $__dirname`.
    expect(logs).toContain('index.spec.ts');
  });
});

</code-example>

<div class="alert is-helpful">

>    When running this test in your repo, you should use a ts-node package, but if you don’t you might want to replace the `index.spec.ts` part with `index.spec.js`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   When running this test in your repo, you need the [`ts-node`](https://github.com/TypeStrong/ts-node) package. You can avoid this by renaming `index.spec.ts` to `index.spec.js`.
```

</div>

### Watch mode

> Architect expects builders to run once by default, and return.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Architect expects builders to run once, by default, and return.
```

* The builder should always emit a `BuilderOutput` object after each execution. Once it’s been executed, it can enter a watch mode, to be triggered by an external event. If an event triggers it to restart, the builder should execute the `BuilderContext.reportRunning()` function to tell Architect that it is running again. This prevents Architect from stopping the builder if another run is scheduled.

When your builder calls `BuilderRun.stop()` to exit watch mode, Architect unsubscribes from the builder’s Observable and calls the builder’s teardown logic to clean up.
(This behavior also allows for long running builds to be stopped and cleaned up.)

In general, if your builder is watching an external event, you should separate your run into three phases.

1. **Running**
   For example, webpack compiles. This ends when webpack finishes and your builder emits a `BuilderOutput` object.

1. **Watching**
   Between two runs, watch an external event stream. For example, webpack watches the file system for any changes. This ends when webpack restarts building, and `BuilderContext.reportRunning()` is called. This goes back to step 1.

1. **Completion**

>    Either the task is fully completed (for example, webpack was supposed to run a number of times), or the builder run was stopped (using `BuilderRun.stop()`). Your teardown logic is executed, and Architect unsubscribes from your build’s Observable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Either the task is fully completed (for example, webpack was supposed to run a number of times), or the builder run was stopped (using `BuilderRun.stop()`). Your teardown logic is executed, and Architect unsubscribes from your builder’s Observable.
```

## Summary

Architect is a new way of changing the behavior of the Angular CLI by using builders to execute custom logic.

* Builders can be synchronous or asynchronous, execute once or watch for external events, and can schedule other builders or targets.

* Builders have option defaults specified in the `angular.json` configuration file, which can be overwritten by an alternate configuration for the target, and further overwritten by command line flags.

* Unit test functions can be used by a builder, but do integration testing for the builder itself, using an instance of Architect.

> * If your builder returns an Observable, it should clean up in the teardown logic of that Observable. The Observable can be unsubscribed by Architect, or it can complete on its own.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't make a lot of sense. @mgechev do you have a better way of stating this?

Reviewer: If we drop the second sentence it makes more sense. IMO, it's clear that the observable can complete and we don't bring much value stating that architect may usubscribe but not saying when.

{
  "projects": {
    {builder-test

>       "architect": {

Reviewer 2: This wasn't quite the right fix. It should be the following:
```js
{
  "projects": {
    "builder-test": {
      "architect": {
        "touch": {
          "builder": "@example/command-runner:command",
            "options": {
              "command": "touch",
              "args": [
                "src/main.ts"
```
